JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill is away, and we look
forward to
having her back as soon as
possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We do.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: It's
Election Day
eve.
Our own John Yang and Jeffrey
Brown are out
on the trail, as the
presidential candidates
dash across the country, revving
up their
vote before time runs out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Monday:
a special pre-election edition
of our Politics
Monday panel, Amy Walter, Susan
Page, and
Andra Gillespie on the final
sprint.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, one year
later, how life
for one Syrian family has
changed since moving
to America, the challenges they
still face.
NABIHA DARBI, Resettled Syrian
Refugee: I
don't know in which country I
would be better,
because my family, some of them
in Turkey,
some of it in Syria, and some of
it in Jordan.
I want all of them in one
country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: This time, the
cliche fits:
It's down to the wire, and
Donald Trump and
Hillary Clinton are campaigning
late into
the night.
Their final blitz came as a last
round of
national polls gave Clinton a
lead of three
to six points.
But Trump has made it close in a
number of
battleground states.
In their final salvos today,
Trump called
Clinton a phony.
She accused him of worsening the
country's
divisions.
Our teams are out on the trail
these final
days.
We start with John Yang, who has
been covering
Hillary Clinton.
JOHN YANG: The last day of
Hillary Clinton's
campaign to become the first
woman president
began in a region where her
opponent has been
showing strength, Western
Pennsylvania.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
We can do this, right?
We can do this.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON:
Tomorrow, you can
vote for a hopeful, inclusive,
big-hearted
America.
JOHN YANG: It's been a long,
strange trip
to Election Day.
Just yesterday, FBI Director
James Comey lifted
the cloud he placed over
Clinton's campaign
and her handling of classified
e-mails.
LEBRON JAMES, Cleveland
Cavaliers: I would
much rather love to hear from
our next president,
Ms. Hillary Clinton.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: In Cleveland
yesterday, she never
mentioned the new Comey letter
as she appeared
with NBA superstar LeBron James
of the champion
Cleveland Cavaliers.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: So let
me ask you
this: Are you ready to vote?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: It was Clinton's
second visit to
Cleveland in three days.
This weekend, she followed an
itinerary set
by polling results and the math
of getting
to 270 electoral votes.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Boy, is
this a hearty
group.
Rain or shine, you're ready.
JOHN YANG: Holding a soggy rally
in Florida
Saturday afternoon, appearing on
stage with
singer Katy Perry that night in
Philadelphia
and with singer James Taylor
last night in
Manchester, New Hampshire.
Her path circled back to
Cleveland.
The swing state of Ohio is again
a key battleground,
and this city is the Democrats'
beachhead.
This weekend, a new poll showed
the race in
Ohio a dead heat.
MAN: Yes, I'm worried.
If I weren't worried, I wouldn't
be here in
Ohio.
WOMAN: I do lose sleep over this
at night.
That's the bottom line.
JOHN YANG: Cindy Demsey is chair
of the Cuyahoga
County Democratic Women's
Caucus.
Why is the vote here in Cuyahoga
County so
important for Democrats?
CINDY DEMSEY, Chair, Cuyahoga
County Democratic
Women's Caucus: So, Cuyahoga
County is the
densest population of Democrats.
So what we need to get all of
our Democrat
votes in to compensate for the
rest of the
state.
WOMAN: Without that, Hillary
cannot take Ohio.
JOHN YANG: That explains the
frenetic activity
at the campaign's office in
Shaker Square.
Among the volunteers being
trained to go door-to-door,
registered nurse Donna Stern,
who lives in
Rochester, New York.
Why come from New York to
Cleveland, Ohio,
to canvass for Hillary?
DONNA STERN, Clinton Volunteer:
Well, New
York state is not one of the
swing states.
So we decided we need to come to
Ohio to help
swing some votes here for Ohio.
JOHN YANG: In every presidential
election
since 2008, Stern's come to Ohio
to talk to
voters.
DONNA STERN: We are willing to
travel four
hours for your state.
And it's -- you know, that's
important to
say, you know, and to vote.
WOMAN: Ain't no party like the
Democratic
Party, because the Democratic
Party don't
stop.
JOHN YANG: The goal?
Get people to the Cuyahoga
County Board of
Elections, where early vote
ballots were cast
all weekend.
MAN: Please have patience.
We will try to make this go as
quickly and
as smoothly as possible.
JOHN YANG: Taking a page from
President Obama's
2012 reelection, the Clinton
campaign is trying
to build a firewall of early
votes in key
states like Ohio, seeking to
roll up a big
lead even before polls open on
Election Day.
MAN: Thank you.
WOMAN: Have a great day.
WOMAN: I just voted.
WOMAN: I'm glad that I did.
I got a chance to participate in
the democratic
process.
WOMAN: What's more important
than doing this?
JOHN YANG: A sign of potential
trouble for
Clinton in Ohio?
Including this weekend, early
voting in Cleveland
is behind 2012.
One early voter was Clara
Parrish.
Is this your first time?
CLARA PARRISH, Ohio: Voting
early?
Yes.
JOHN YANG: And it was because of
the calls
and the urgings from one -- from
the Democratic
campaign?
CLARA PARRISH: Correct.
JOHN YANG: The campaign even
enlisted Jay-Z
and Beyonce.
They held a free concert for
Clinton in Cleveland
Friday night.
Tickets were distributed
directly across the
street from the Board of
Elections, where
people were encouraged to vote
early.
The concert was intended to
energize two of
the voting blocs campaign
officials say are
crucial to Clinton's potential
success: African-Americans
and millennials.
JOE SIMS, Ohio: I have always
been Democratic.
Win or lose, I will be a
Democrat all my life.
JOHN YANG: The black vote is
especially important
in Cleveland, which is about 53
percent African-American.
At Sunday services at the Olivet
Institutional
Baptist Church on Cleveland's
East Side, Pastor
Jawanza Colvin preached the
power of voting.
REV.
JAWANZA COLVIN, Institutional
Baptist Church:
It's in our hands to decide who
is going to
win on Tuesday.
It's in our hands.
We are going to vote on Tuesday.
And we're going to make sure
that every black
person we know votes.
Somebody say amen.
We always do our jobs.
JOHN YANG: Black churches don't
just talk
the talk.
They walk the walk, picking up
worshipers
from services to take them to
early voting,
a program they call Souls to the
Polls.
WOMAN: Do you want to help us
stop Donald
Trump?
JOHN YANG: Amid concerns about
African-American
turnout, millennials could give
Clinton the
edge she needs in Ohio.
This weekend, volunteers from
NextGen Climate
talked to voters around the
campus of Case
Western Reserve University.
In the closing days of what's
been a remarkably
negative and personal campaign,
Clinton has
finally turned to a more
positive and uplifting
message, something the campaign
had been promising
to do for weeks.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: If you
give me the
privilege of your vote tomorrow,
that's what
I will do every single day of my
presidency,
to knock down barriers, to
create opportunities
so that you have the chance to
fill your own
dreams.
You see, I believe America's
best days are
still ahead of us.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: For this Clinton
rally in Philadelphia
on Independence Mall, it's an
all-star lineup.
She will be with President
Obama, Michelle
Obama, former President Bill
Clinton and Bruce
Springsteen.
It has the feel of a grand
finale, but there's
one more event, a midnight rally
in another
key state, North Carolina --
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John, tell us
about the
choice of states.
We know at the end it's all
about location.
She is ahead in Michigan, in
Pennsylvania,
North Carolina a little bit
closer.
Why are they going to these
places on this
last day?
JOHN YANG: The campaign wants to
nail the
door shut, they say, on a
possible path for
Donald Trump to 270 electoral
votes.
Another reason why they're
coming back here
to Pennsylvania, this is the
third stop here
in three days and in Michigan
today, these
states don't have early voting,
so unlike
other states, they don't know
who's been voting
because of canvassing fieldwork.
They want to make sure they get
people out
to the polls tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Yang
reporting to us from
Philadelphia, thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to Jeffrey
Brown, who's
been following Donald Trump in
this final
campaign push.
MAN: The next president of the
United States,
Donald J. Trump!
JEFFREY BROWN: How much does
Donald Trump
need North Carolina?
Count the ways and count the
days he's been
here as the election nears.
By all accounts, this is a
must-win state.
And this afternoon, he was back
again, before
a large crowd at Raleigh's J.S.
Dorton Arena.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
This is amazing.
What a great place.
Thank you very much.
JEFFREY BROWN: Following FBI
Director Comey's
latest dramatic announcement,
Trump didn't
back down.
DONALD TRUMP: Of course the FBI,
the director,
was obviously under tremendous
pressure, so
they went through 650,000
e-mails in eight
days.
Yeah, right.
JEFFREY BROWN: That issue was
also on the
minds of his supporters, some of
whom had
waited outside for hours.
MAN: I think there's something
there.
I think that it's kind of being
covered up.
I think a lot of people here
think it's being
covered up.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's been a mad
dash, with
stops all over the electoral map
in Minnesota,
Michigan, Pennsylvania and
several more states
just this weekend.
We joined the campaign yesterday
in Iowa at
the Sioux City Convention
Center.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to win
the great
state of Iowa, and we are going
to win back
the White House.
JEFFREY BROWN: First-time voter
Kailey Bledsoe
said she likes Trump's
independence.
KAILEY BLEDSOE, Trump Supporter:
I'm voting
for Trump because I believe he
has the best
intentions for our country.
I like that he's not -- he's
never been like
into politics.
And I like that he's supporting
himself.
And I really that he's -- he
really has his
own beliefs and that he's not
listening him
to anyone.
Nobody is paying him to say
anything.
JEFFREY BROWN: That youthful
enthusiasm was
reflected in a new Des Moines
Register poll
showing Trump up by a healthy
seven-point
margin in Iowa, his largest lead
to date,
this after Barack Obama won the
state twice
and Democrats have carried six
of the last
seven presidential elections.
J. ANN SELZER, Selzer & Company,
Inc.: He's
winning among independents in
Iowa right now.
JEFFREY BROWN: Trump has reached
beyond his
core constituency here, says
pollster Ann
Selzer.
J. ANN SELZER: The other thing
that we're
seeing here is a change in the
character of
the younger voter.
And in Iowa, part of the
backbone of the Obama
coalition were young voters, and
he won here
by substantial margins with
people under the
age of 35.
Trump is now winning with that
group.
They're more likely to identify
as Republicans.
JEFFREY BROWN: He's winning
among young people?
J. ANN SELZER: He's winning
among young people.
JEFFREY BROWN: Iowa's
demographics help Trump,
a population mostly white, more
rural, less
affluent and fewer college
graduates.
And his campaign strategy has
been to ignite
these voters in battleground
states across
the country.
Also helping Trump, leading
party members
here, including Governor Terry
Branstad, have
supported him even through low
points in the
campaign.
The governor's son Eric, in
fact, serves as
Trump's Iowa director.
ERIC BRANSTAD, Trump Iowa
Campaign Director:
This is a campaign like I have
never seen
before.
Usually, when I go to a
Republican rally,
spending a lifetime in politics,
I know everybody
there.
This is a campaign that has
brought in Democrats,
independents.
JEFF KAUFMANN, Chairman,
Republican Party
of Iowa: This election is bigger
than Donald
Trump.
JEFFREY BROWN: But at a rally to
energize
volunteers, Trump himself was
rarely mentioned.
State Republican chairman Jeff
Kaufmann said
this:
JEFF KAUFMANN: Now, is our
candidate perfect?
Nope.
Any of you people perfect?
Am I perfect?
Nope.
The only way that grassroots
politics works
is for us to accept the nominee
that the people
give us.
JEFFREY BROWN: To make sure core
Republicans
actually vote, the party had
canvassers out
this weekend, employing an app
similar to
what Democrats have long used;
20-year old
Jillian Dunker grew up outside
Des Moines.
JILLIAN DUNKER, Iowa: So you can
click on
this, it will show you their
name, their age,
their gender.
It shows you their registered
party and also
their modeled party.
JEFFREY BROWN: Oh, modeled in
this case like
hard Republican.
JILLIAN DUNKER: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you know
that's the core.
JILLIAN DUNKER: Yes.
Yes.
So, we also see how often they
vote.
So we know the tactics that we
have to use
when we go to that door to try
and get them
to, A, vote for our candidates
and, B, get
them to go actually vote.
JEFFREY BROWN: How to explain
Donald Trump's
popularity?
Veteran pollster Ann Selzer:
J. ANN SELZER: I have been
listening to people
talk about a candidate like
Donald Trump and
sometimes by name for 12 years.
People are looking for something
else, something
different.
And if Donald Trump isn't
something different,
I don't know who is.
WOMAN: Hello.
How are you today?
WOMAN: Good.
WOMAN: Would you like a guide?
JEFFREY BROWN: Something
different, for sure.
But can that win here in North
Carolina as
well?
Voters in Cary this weekend
waited in lines
up to three hours to cast their
early ballots,
a diverse group of people
reflecting an increasingly
diverse state, including many
with college
degrees and higher incomes, a
challenge for
Trump.
UNC Professor Ferrel Guillory.
FERREL GUILLORY, University of
North Carolina:
So the Trump-Clinton election in
this state
represents this clash of people
who look back
to what they see as a better
America, and
those who look forward to the --
to rising
affluence and a more tolerant
society that
they want to live in, in the
future.
JEFFREY BROWN: North Carolina
has been a classic
flip-flop state.
It voted for Barack Obama by the
slimmest
of margins in 2008 and then went
back to the
Republican column with Mitt
Romney by another
small margin in 2012.
ZAN BUNN, North Carolina
Federation of Republican
Women: Did you already vote?
WOMAN: Yes, we have.
ZAN BUNN: OK.
Would you like a sticker?
OK.
Thank you so much.
JEFFREY BROWN: Zan Bunn, head of
the North
Carolina Federation of
Republican Women, wants
to reach beyond the party's
core.
She canvassed around Raleigh
this weekend,
including at the Wendell Harvest
Festival.
ZAN BUNN: Diversity is always a
positive.
And it's important for
Republicans to message
well to everyone.
And that is perhaps not as well
announced
as it should be.
But we just continue to try.
JEFFREY BROWN: As Donald Trump
arrived here
this afternoon, polls showed a
very close
race, meaning all eyes will be
on this key
battleground state when the
votes are tallied
tomorrow.
Donald Trump finished up his
rally at the
arena behind me just a short
time ago.
I was able to talk to a Trump
official earlier
today.
He told me they were cautiously
optimistic
here in North Carolina.
That sounds about right.
I don't think anybody can be
completely confident
about what will happen tomorrow
-- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jeff, you have
been on the
trail with Trump for the last
couple of days.
What is his closing argument to
his supporters?
JEFFREY BROWN: Hari, he is
staying on message.
And the message is, I am an
agent of change.
I will change what's happening
in Washington.
I will change what's been
happening with the
government.
I will lead you to make America
great.
This is the argument we have
been hearing.
But this is a Donald Trump very
much on message.
He goes through the list of
negatives and
positives, from Hillary Clinton
corruption,
as he refers to it, to
Obamacare, to his own
attributes.
And he stays on message.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is it working?
Does it connect with the crowd?
JEFFREY BROWN: I think it seems
to be working
the crowds we have seen,
certainly.
But he's speaking, really, to
the core right
now, and the whole idea at this
point is get
out the vote.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Jeff Brown joining
us from Raleigh, North Carolina,
tonight,
thanks so much.
In the day's other news: The
Justice Department
announced it is sending more
than 500 staffers
to 28 states to watch for civil
rights violations
at the polls.
That's down a third from four
years ago.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Supreme
Court refused
today to reimpose curbs on
partisan poll watchers
in Ohio.
Democrats wanted the
restrictions, citing
fears of voter intimidation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street shot
higher today,
as investors appeared to shed
doubts about
the election outcome.
That came after the FBI said
newly found e-mails
warrant no action against
Hillary Clinton.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 371
points to close at 18259.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 120, and
the S&P 500
added 46.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Syria,
Kurdish-led forces
pressed toward Raqqa today, the
Islamic State's
de facto capital.
They announced the offensive on
Sunday, beginning
what promises to be a prolonged
fight.
The U.S. military is providing
the coalition
of Kurdish and Arab fighters
with air support.
An estimated 5,000 ISIS fighters
are in the
city.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iraqi troops are
still advancing
on ISIS forces holding Mosul,
and now they
have found a mass grave with 100
beheaded
victims.
The site was uncovered just
south of the city.
It's not known if the bodies are
civilians
or soldiers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A thick layer
of acrid smog
hung over large parts of India
today, the
worst in 17 years.
A million schoolchildren stayed
home, and
people lined up to buy face
masks around the
capital of New Delhi.
The gray haze contains smoke,
ash and other
pollutants, causing shortness of
breath, watery
eyes and coughing.
Environmentalists urged new
government action.
SUNITA NARAIN, India's Center
for Science
and Environment (through
translator): It is
a public health emergency.
We hope that the Supreme Court
will advise
the government to take some
strict measures
to clean the air around Delhi.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One plan
that's under consideration,
bringing back a curb on road
traffic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: China has barred
two elected
lawmakers in Hong Kong from
taking office,
after they openly advocated
independence.
It's the first time that Beijing
has gone
that far since Britain returned
Hong Kong
to Chinese rule in 1997.
The maneuver has sparked new
protests in the
city against the communist
government's control.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country: The
people of Cushing, Oklahoma,
surveyed earthquake
damage today.
Sunday's magnitude-5 tremor hit
just west
of the city, a major commercial
hub for oil.
Up to 50 buildings were damaged,
and officials
cordoned off parts of city.
There was no damage to oil
facilities.
Oklahoma has had thousands of
quakes in recent
years, caused mainly by
injecting oil industry
wastewater into the ground.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Janet Reno, the
first woman
to be U.S. attorney general, has
died in Miami
of Parkinson's disease.
She served almost eight years
under President
Clinton, and was known for her
blunt manner,
once declaring, "I don't do
spin."
But she drew criticism for
authorizing a deadly
raid on the Branch Davidian cult
in Waco,
Texas, in 1993, and the return
of a Cuban
boy, Elian Gonzalez, to Havana
in 2000.
She looked ahead on the
"NewsHour" in 2001.
JANET RENO, Former U.S. Attorney
General:
Until the day I die, or until
the day I can't
think anymore, I want to be
involved in the
issues that I care about, how we
make the
law real for all people, how we
give people
access to the law.
I'm vitally interested in
cyber-crime and
in preparing law enforcement for
a time when
crime is international in its
origins and
its consequences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a statement
today, President
Obama called Reno an American
original who
left the nation a better place.
Janet Reno was 78 years old.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And in
Philadelphia, a weeklong
transit strike has come to an
end just in
time to avoid affecting voter
turnout tomorrow.
Public transportation workers
and the main
transit agency reached a
tentative agreement
on a new contract early today.
It will boost wages, and provide
better pensions
and health care coverage.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a full analysis
of what to watch for on Election
Day; reconnecting
with a Syrian family one year
after they fled
their home; students give their
advice for
whichever candidate becomes the
next president
of the United States; and much
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow on
Election Day, we
will be following a lot of
numbers and data
here at the "NewsHour."
A big part of that are the
so-called exit
polls.
They're also part of what's used
to project
winners before the final real
vote counts
come in.
We thought we'd talk about how
that works
and take a look at the
all-important electoral
vote map, with our friend
Domenico Montanaro.
He's NPR's lead editor for
politics.
Domenico, it's great to see you.
Great to be here.
So, let's look at this map.
This is your map, the NPR map.
Tell us what it shows.
DOMENICO MONTANARO, Political
Editor, NPR:
Well, first of all, going into
Election Day,
Hillary Clinton quite clearly
has the advantage.
She could get over 270 electoral
votes, 274
by our count, because I moved
Nevada from
our last map to now lean
Democratic, where
it had been in tossup.
I moved New Hampshire back to
tossup.
So, when you look at it here,
just all of
the states that are leaning
towards Clinton's
way, if those Democratic base
voters hold
and show up to vote, Hillary
Clinton would
win.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is even
without the so-called
tossup states?
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which you haven't
even put
those in his or her category.
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Well, think
about the
fact that you could have
somebody win without
Florida and Ohio and Iowa and
North Carolina.
Like, that's pretty unheard of
in recent modern
American political history.
But because of demographic
change and where
we're at in this election,
that's totally
possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What she could
do.
So, then, If that's the case,
what is Donald
Trump's path?
What does he have to do?
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Well,
clearly, Donald
Trump is going to have to break
off a piece
of that blue wall.
We were thinking possibly it was
in Nevada,
maybe it could be New Hampshire.
It wouldn't be enough for him
right now.
He have to pick off a state like
Nevada.
But it's why you have seen now
he's barnstorming
the country in what are
traditionally lean-Democratic
states, places that have gone
Democratic in
a lot of the last six elections
-- in all
of the last six elections,
places like Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Michigan.
They feel better about Michigan,
but the Clinton
campaign is saying that they're
still up there.
And you have President Obama
going back to
make sure that African-American
voters get
out to vote.
They feel like if they get their
voters out,
then they will win.
Trump would have to pick off one
of those
cinder blocks.
If he can do it, all bets are
off.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, when you say
the big blue
wall, we're talking about that
Upper Midwest.
And we see that in light blue
color.
Domenico, I want to turn you now
to talk about
exit polls.
That's something that comes up
every election
year.
Remind us, what are they, who
runs them?
DOMENICO MONTANARO: So, exit
polls are commissioned
by the national media, the big
broadcast organizations,
some print organizations like
The New York
Times, The Washington Post, ABC,
NBC, CNN,
for example.
They pay a group called Edison
Research, which
does -- creates what's called
the National
Exit Poll Consortium.
It's a lot of money.
The public broadcasters, we
should say, PBS,
NPR, we're not participating in
it this time
around.
So when you see those numbers,
they will be
coming from that consortium.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And they -- what
they do is,
they have, what, thousands of
people who go
out around the country and
interview people
after they have left the polls.
DOMENICO MONTANARO: That's
right.
You will see about 100,000
people as part
of the sample.
And why that's really amazing is
that, when
you think about a normal
national poll, there's
about 1,000 people sampled, with
about 3.5
percent margin of error.
You're talking about 100,000
people over the
entire country, so much smaller
margin of
error when it comes to that.
It would be every fourth person
who leaves
the exit polling place, an exit
pollster would
try to approach them and try to
get them to
take a questionnaire, fill it
out and then
that information is relayed
back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Domenico, we
have heard
so much this year about how big
the early
vote is, something like, what,
40-some million
people voting early.
How do they measure those votes,
or absentee
votes, for example?
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Well, when
it comes to
exit polling early voters, they
will do a
phone, a normal phone poll.
So they will call a place like
Washington
state or Oregon or Colorado,
where they do
a lot of mail-only ballots, so
that they can
get demographic information to
plug into the
exit poll.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then so those
news organizations
that are part of this, they're
the ones, including
the Associated Press, which we
at the "NewsHour"
will be relying on, they take
that information,
and then how do they turn that
into a projected
winner?
DOMENICO MONTANARO: And us at
NPR, too, we
should say, are relying on the
Associated
Press' calls.
What they do is they take three
different
things.
They take historical data, they
take the exit
polls, and they take actual
results.
What they will do with exit
polling information
is, they will go into places
that are barometer
precincts, for example.
And when they get some actual
information
or they get exit poll
information that shows
the direction of where that's
headed, then
they can make a call.
Now, I should say one thing.
When you see a lot of the places
that call
a state with zero percent in or
1 percent
in, it's very rarely that state
that gets
it wrong, because, historically,
that's usually
a state that's pretty far apart
and the exit
polls back it up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In other words, a
state that's
been reliably Republican or
reliably Democratic.
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Yes, like a
New York or
California or something.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And those are the
states that
we expect to be called as soon
as the polls
close, or very shortly after.
DOMENICO MONTANARO: That's
right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's the ones
where it's close
where we will be waiting and
waiting and maybe
waiting.
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Right, in
those states
too close to call.
And if they are too close to
call, you're
looking at later in the night,
11:00 at the
very least most likely, because
that's when
it's been called in the last two
elections.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We can't wait.
We're all on the edge of our
seats.
DOMENICO MONTANARO: It's almost
over.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Domenico
Montanaro, NPR, thank
you so much.
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now for our
election eve
edition of Politics Monday.
We're joined by Amy Walter of
The Cook Political
Report, Susan Page, Washington
bureau chief
of USA Today, and Andra
Gillespie of Emory
University.
It's great to have all of you
with us.
Amy, we just heard a little from
Domenico
Montanaro of NPR about what he
thinks the
map looks like.
What do you think it looks like
right now?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: I don't
really disagree with that at
all.
And I think every election, I
come in with
the grand hopes that we look at
the map, and
we look at when the polls close,
and we say
we're going to be able to
project out how
this map is going to come
together over the
course of the night.
But, as you all discussed,
sometimes, a state
is a little bit too close to
call.
Sometimes, a state comes in
earlier than you
expected.
So, really, what I'm really
looking for are
the anomalies.
What's a state that we didn't
expect to go
one way that is going that way?
What is that going to tell us?
So, for example, if Georgia goes
to Hillary
Clinton, that tells us she is
going to have
a really, really, really big
night.
If a state like Michigan does
end up going
to Donald Trump, that says maybe
that Rust
Belt strategy paid off.
That is more likely the --
that's what I'm
going to be looking for.
But, really, the three states
that I'm going
to be paying attention to, that
everybody
in America will be paying
attention to, Florida,
North Carolina, and
Pennsylvania.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Susan, what
are your early
indicators if you're looking out
to...
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Ohio I would put on that list as
well.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
Yes.
SUSAN PAGE: Because, if you look
at Florida,
North Carolina, Ohio, Donald
Trump needs to
win all of them.
If Hillary Clinton wins one of
them, that's
a pretty good sign that she is a
path to victory.
And if you look at early closing
states, Georgia,
the polls close at 7:00.
So, that's, as you say, a state
that ought
to go red.
So, if it goes blue, that's a
big sign.
Virginia also closes as 7:00.
That's a state that ought to go
blue.
So, if that goes red, that is a
sign that
Donald Trump is going to have a
better night
than we think.
One of the interesting things
about this year's
map is that it's different, I
think, from
previous years because of Donald
Trump's appeal
to white working-class voters
and because
of changing demographics with
Latino voters.
So, we have seen Southwestern
states, like,
Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico
being more likely
to go blue than in the past and
these Industrial
Midwestern states more likely to
go red.
So, in some ways, I think we're
in a kind
of transition in this country in
terms of
the coalition that are behind
each of the
parties.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Andra Gillespie,
you spend
a lot of time looking at
demographics.
What do you see when you look at
both the
African-American, the Latino
component of
this electorate?
ANDRA GILLESPIE, Emory
University: Well, I
am wondering whether or not 2016
is going
to be for Latinos what 1964 was
for African-Americans.
So, in particular, I'm
interested in the break
in the vote for Hillary Clinton
vs. Donald
Trump amongst Latino voters.
A lot of the polling, Latino
Decisions, for
instance, is saying right now
that she will
get 75 percent of the Latino
vote.
And what I want to see is
whether or not that's
actually higher for the
undecideds, whether
or not they start to break
towards Clinton,
she actually gets upwards of 80
percent of
the Latino vote.
I think that that suggests a
huge shift in
our politics.
And it suggests that that new
Democratic majority
that is being made up of a
multicultural coalition
is something that's already
here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Amy, in the
postmortem to
the Mitt Romney loss,
Republicans wanted to
go out and court the Latino
vote.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
They did that really well.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: So, they nominated a
candidate
who has done two amazing things.
One, not only did he not reach
out and broaden
the Romney coalition.
So he's doing much worse among
all non-white
voters, but he also found a way
to actually
split up the Romney coalition.
So, among these white
working-class voters,
he's doing a little bit better
than Mitt Romney,
but among white voters with a
college education,
he's doing a lot worse.
And so, to me, what I'm most
fascinated to
see is, one, as Andra points to,
what the
new coalition is going to look
like, but then
to see whether or not it lasts
post this election
and these two unique
individuals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're really
guilty at election
time of breaking the electorate
up into groups,
into this ethnic group and that
gender.
But, Susan, I do want to ask
about women,
because the polls do indicate
that Hillary
Clinton is doing much better
among women voters
than Donald Trump.
You would expect that of a
Democrat, but this
year it just seems to be
markedly more so.
SUSAN PAGE: And, of course,
she's our first
woman nominee of a major party
for president,
so that may have some resonance.
Also, Donald Trump in particular
I think has
driven some women voters away
from the GOP
who might otherwise have voted
for the Republican
nominee, even with Democrats
nominating a
women.
And that would be white
college-educated women,
independent women, women in
suburban areas.
That's one of the swing groups
that we should
be watching for.
I think the two -- you talk
about we break
groups down.
And that's true.
The two critical groups in this
election are
Latinos.
And early voting in Nevada and
in Florida
indicate a big surge in Latino
turnout.
And white women, who
historically have voted
for the Republican Party, do
they move to
the Democratic Party?
It looks like they will do that.
And to Amy's point, do they
stick?
Is it more than a one-election
affair?
HARI SREENIVASAN: How much did
the Comey news
over the weekend play into this,
and what
kind of an impact did it have,
considering
what happened a couple of weeks
ago and what
happened last night?
AMY WALTER: What House Democrats
will tell
you is, they think that that
blunted their
momentum enough -- they were
doing very well
up until this point, thinking
they could flip
a few more seats -- it blunted
their momentum
enough that it might cost them
five to 10
seats.
So, they, of all the folks out
there, are
the most upset about the change
there.
I think it also blunted the
ability for Hillary
Clinton to be able to try to
change her
favorable-to-unfavorable
ratio.
It was starting to inch up.
Her favorable ratings were
starting to inch
up.
Now they're back a little bit
better than
Donald Trump's, not much better.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Andra, would
you agree
with that analysis?
Are we looking at mainly an
impact on Senate
and House races, less so on the
overall?
ANDRA GILLESPIE: I would agree.
When I think about how hard,
fast people's
opinions were about this race,
they were actually
fixed before this e-mail
investigation was
open.
So, if you hated Hillary
Clinton, this wasn't
going to change your mind
because you were
not voting for her anyway.
And if you were already
committed to Clinton,
then you were already going to
vote for her.
So, I guess this gives Clinton
supporters
greater sort of support and
affirmation of
their decision to choose to vote
for her.
But I think, at this point, most
people had
already made up their mind.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Susan, what
about the spread?
In that week, there were a lot
of early voters
that went to the polls.
SUSAN PAGE: There were 40
million early voters
between the first Comey letter
and the second
Comey letter.
And they went and voted on the
assumption
that there was probably
something serious
that the FBI was going to look
at.
So, I think it probably had an
energizing
effect with some Republicans,
Republicans
maybe not that enthused about
Donald Trump,
but, man, this is a reminder of
why I don't
want to vote for Hillary
Clinton, and probably
a depressive effect among some
Democratic
voters.
I don't think it swings a state,
but I think
hurt on the margins.
And, like Amy, I have talked to
some strategists
for down-ballot races that think
it's probably
cost them a Senate seat or two
and a handful
of House races.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, it wouldn't
be election
eve, Amy, if I didn't ask you
about, what
are you looking for tomorrow
night?
The polls close officially at
7:00.
What are you going to be
watching for?
AMY WALTER: Well, those states
that we just
discussed are really what I'm
going to be
looking for.
So, let's see if -- I think Ohio
is a great
place to look.
This is a state where Donald
Trump has been
leading.
The expectation is that he --
this is a state
he can win.
But from what we're seeing on
the early vote
and on the ground, that Hillary
Clinton's
closing that gap.
If Hillary Clinton wins Ohio, I
think this
suggests this is going to be a
very good,
big night for Hillary Clinton.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Susan, from
our reporters
on both these trails, we kind of
saw a mishmash
of different travel decisions on
where to
go.
Donald Trump is trying to make
inroads into
Michigan to crack that blue wall
of support.
And then Hillary Clinton is
still trying to
shore up places like Arizona and
North Carolina.
SUSAN PAGE: Well, Hillary
Clinton has had
a very strategic plan that has
involved going
now to the states that didn't
have early voting,
like Pennsylvania and Michigan,
really focused
there, very smart use of
surrogates, use of
Barack Obama to try go gin up
black turnout
in Florida and North Carolina,
where the early
voting indicated black turnout
was down.
And with Donald Trump, you don't
see a strategy.
You see a throw the spaghetti
against the
wall and hope it sticks
somewhere, because
he's now in a place where he
needs to run
the table.
He needs every battleground
state that could
break his way to break his way.
And then he still needs another
state, which
is why he went to places like
Minnesota and
Michigan, where he's unlikely to
win.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Andra, I want to
ask you about
Georgia.
It's a state you know very well.
You're teaching there right now
at Emory.
This is not a state that Hillary
Clinton spent
time in, but the Democrats sure
are pulling
out all the stops trying to get
out the vote
that they think could go to her.
What does that look like right
now?
ANDRA GILLESPIE: Well, right
now, most of
the polls suggest that Donald
Trump will still
win the state, but the margin is
probably
going to be even more narrow
than it was 2008.
So that's something that's
really, really
important to think about.
The Democratic Party of Georgia
has spent
months trying to convince the
DNC that this
was a state that was worth
investing in.
And this actually shows that.
In particular in Georgia, I'm
going to be
paying attention to Gwinnett
County.
This is a Republican stronghold.
But, demographically, it has
shifted so a
majority of the voters are now
voters of color.
If they vote Democratic, then
that represents
the change that the Democratic
Party in Georgia
has been predicting for the last
five years
in the state.
AMY WALTER: And isn't it also
challenging
too because it also has a high
concentration
of white college-educated
voters.
ANDRA GILLESPIE: White
college-educated voters.
AMY WALTER: So, you get both of
those.
ANDRA GILLESPIE: At the same
time, in addition
to sort of looking west in
Fulton and Cobb
County as well.
AMY WALTER: Agreed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which reminds us
that education
is something else we're going to
be watching
out for tomorrow night, those
voters with
and without a college education
and how they
divide.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, it's
great to have
all of you.
Amy Walter, Andra Gillespie,
Susan Page, thank
you.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
ANDRA GILLESPIE: Thank you.
AMY WALTER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And please join
us tomorrow,
of course, for our special live
coverage.
JOHN YANG: Election Day 2016,
the historic
end to a long campaign.
Who will voters elect as the
next president
of the United States?
Which party will control
Congress?
What else will we learn from the
voters?
Join "PBS NewsHour" for special
election night
coverage, analysis you won't
find anywhere
else, Tuesday November 8,
starting at 8:00,
7:00 Central, only on PBS.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In this
campaign, the topic
of refugees from war-torn Syria
has been a
political flash point.
We want to look at what it's
been like for
refugees themselves.
In 2015, just under 1,700 Syrian
refugees
were resettled in the United
States.
This year, that number has shot
up to more
than 12,000, a significant
increase, but few
in comparison to Canada, which
has taken in
33,000 this year, or Europe,
which has absorbed
hundreds of thousands of people
fleeing the
war at home.
Last year, special correspondent
Marcia Biggs
introduced us to one Syrian
family that arrived
in the U.S. as part of that
first group.
She recently checked back in
with them amid
a difficult transition to life
here, and sent
us this report.
MARCIA BIGGS: A typical
afternoon in this
New Jersey home, mom in the
kitchen, son reading
on the sofa and preteen daughter
chatting
on her smartphone.
It's a mundane reality compared
to the horror
they have fled, a war zone in
Syria, overcrowded
refugee camps in Jordan.
We first met the Darbi family
last year.
Newly arrived, they were five of
the roughly
1,700 Syrians resettled in the
U.S. in 2015,
living with the help of grants
from the federal
government and Church World
Service, one of
nine NGOs organizations
assisting refugee
resettlement, helping them find
housing and
enroll in language classes.
For husband and wife Mohamed and
Amira, it
was the chance for a new life.
Their three children were
starting the first
week of school.
Hope was in the air.
But today:
MOHAMED DARBI, Resettled Syrian
Refugee (through
translator): I'm surprised that,
a year later,
I'm still in the same place.
In fact, I feel that I have gone
backwards.
I feel like, next year, I might
fail.
They should have given us more
time for school,
so that we could learn the
language.
MARCIA BIGGS: Five months after
their arrival,
the financial assistance ended
and Mohamed
struggled to find a steady job.
Once a carpenter in Syria, he is
currently
doing manual labor at a
construction site,
having abandoned language
classes.
Without a car, he cycles to job
sites and
barely makes enough to afford
this two-bedroom
apartment.
Six-year-old Shaker (ph) sleeps
in his parents'
room.
MARCIA BIGGS: When was the last
time you spoke
to someone from Church World
Service?
MOHAMED DARBI (through
translator): It was
a long time ago.
In the office, they treated us
as if we need
special connections for a simple
request.
How am I going to ask them for a
job?
MARCIA BIGGS: According to
Church World Service,
his frustration is typical of
refugees who
have high expectations and lack
understanding
of the concept of starting from
the ground
up.
We spoke with Sarah Krause,
director of programs.
SARAH KRAUSE, Church World
Service: It's a
challenge to find something in
the refugee's
chosen field.
And that's going to take a
little more time.
It also takes time to learn
English.
Oftentimes, in families, both
the husband
and the wife need to work in
order to really
support the family, just as is
the case with
American families.
We receive a very limited amount
of money
to provide those initial
resettlement services.
It's $2,025 per individual.
That's not a lot of money to get
someone started
in the United States.
MARCIA BIGGS: Just over 300
Syrian refugees
arrived in New Jersey in the
last year.
Like the Darbi family, most of
them were resettled
here in the shadow of New York
City's Freedom
Tower.
But some people argue that
placing them here
may have actually hurt their
chances for integration.
MOHAMED KHAIRULLAH, Mayor of
Prospect Park,
New Jersey: Most of the Syrian
refugees that
are coming into New Jersey are
being settled
in either Jersey City or
Elizabeth, which
really doesn't have any Syrian
community there.
MARCIA BIGGS: Mohamed Khairullah
is also a
Syrian refugee.
Born in Aleppo, he was just a
child in 1980
when his family fled a crackdown
by Bashar
al-Assad's father, Hafez.
He emigrated to the U.S. in
1991, settling
in Prospect Park, New Jersey,
about 20 miles
from the Darbis.
He's been mayor here for over a
decade.
He believes that resettling
refugees in Arab
neighborhoods like his would
provide a support
network, and make finding them
the right job
and getting them into English
classes easier.
MOHAMED KHAIRULLAH: Most of
them, you speak
to them and they say, listen, we
want to work,
we want to provide for our
families.
We don't want to go from one
organization
to another, asking for help.
It's humiliating to us.
And these private organizations
need to speak
to us, need to communicate with
us, need to
let us know ahead of time when
there is a
refugee family coming in, so we
could try
to find a home for them in our
areas.
MARCIA BIGGS: While the Darbis
say their neighbors
are friendly, not one of them is
Arab, and
the family has very little
interaction with
them.
Do you have any kind of a
support network?
If there is an emergency, who do
you call?
MOHAMED DARBI (through
translator): There
is no one.
MARCIA BIGGS: The children are
their ray of
hope.
Last year, then 11-year-old
Hajar and 13-year-old
Nabiha couldn't speak a lick of
English.
But this year:
What's your favorite music?
What do you dance to?
NABIHA DARBI, Resettled Syrian
Refugee: "Rolling
in the Deep."
MARCIA BIGGS: Adele?
You like Adele?
NABIHA DARBI: Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: One other change
we noticed?
Hajar began wearing a hijab,
something she
says she was proud to do when
she turned 12
years old, and a decision her
parents say
she made on her own.
MOHAMED DARBI (through
translator): I felt
that she was still young.
I told her maybe you should
wait.
But she insisted.
MARCIA BIGGS: Do you know why
she wanted to
wear it earlier?
AMIRA DARBI, Resettled Syrian
Refugee (through
translator): Maybe it was
because, after she
started school here in the
States, she wanted
to show people her culture and
traditions.
MARCIA BIGGS: The girls say they
have been
bullied in school, often because
of their
religion.
HAJAR DARBI, Resettled Syrian
Refugee (through
translator): I didn't just wear
the hijab
because I have to.
It was because kids at school
were telling
my sister to take off her hijab.
They were telling her that this
is America
and we don't wear hijab here.
A few weeks later, I started
wearing the hijab
and the kids at school started
asking me,
are you Muslim, are you Muslim?
And I said, yes, I am Muslim.
It's nobody's business but mine.
MARCIA BIGGS: Even with these
obstacles, the
girls say they are happy in
school, love their
teachers, and their classes.
Hajar still wants to be a
doctor, but Nabiha
says she wants to be an artist.
Do you feel like you're home
here?
HAJAR DARBI: Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: You do?
HAJAR DARBI: And our future is
here, not in
Syria.
MARCIA BIGGS: Those are very big
words for
a young girl, and for Nabiha,
who has more
memories of Syria, it's much
more complicated.
NABIHA DARBI: I don't know.
This is a good country.
And I like it.
If there is no war in Syria, I
will come back.
But I will visit this country.
I don't know in which country I
would be better,
because my family, some of them
in Turkey,
some of it in Syria, and some of
it in Jordan.
I want all of them in one
country.
MARCIA BIGGS: Her English
doesn't suffice
to describe the painful
separation of displacement.
NABIHA DARBI (through
translator): I am used
to having them around ever since
I was a child.
If I can't see them, I don't
think I can carry
on in this life.
Every member of my family is in
a different
country.
I can't even comprehend this.
MARCIA BIGGS: The family also
arrived in one
of the most politically
polarizing times in
recent U.S. history, with parts
of that conflict
surrounding both Syrian refugees
and Islam,
New Jersey Governor Chris
Christie shutting
the door on Syrian refugees in
his state,
Donald Trump calling for a
temporary ban on
all Muslims entering the U.S.
and making so-
called extreme vetting of
refugees a campaign
issue.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
And we now have them in our
country, and wait
until you see.
This is going to be the great
Trojan horse.
MOHAMED DARBI (through
translator): He's talking
about a plan he doesn't know
anything about.
It took a whole year of vetting
before we
were allowed to come here.
Does he want a 10-year vetting
process?
The war would be over by then.
We didn't come to America with
any bad intentions.
We came here asking for safety.
If our country weren't
completely destroyed,
we wouldn't have left.
MARCIA BIGGS: How do those
comments make you
feel?
MOHAMED DARBI (through
translator): I feel
like an innocent man in jail for
a crime I
didn't commit.
I feel frustrated.
I keep asking myself, is it
possible that
some people here might think
this way?
When I think of Americans, they
are innovators.
They reached the moon.
But with this type of thinking,
you can't
reach the moon.
MARCIA BIGGS: So, have we
disappointed you?
MOHAMED DARBI (through
translator): No.
I'm telling you, the American
people do not
disappoint me.
But, as the saying goes, the
politicians are
throwing gasoline on a fire.
MARCIA BIGGS: Despite the
difficulties, the
Darbis remain grateful, even
hospitable.
MOHAMED DARBI (through
translator): The children
have become safe and secure, and
now they
have a future.
It means they are living a
normal life.
I'm beyond exhausted.
I was expecting better.
But when it comes to normal
life, it's wonderful.
MARCIA BIGGS: A normal life and
a hope for
a better tomorrow.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Marcia Biggs in
Jersey City, New Jersey.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Since our
interview, Church
World Service has reached out to
both Mayor
Khairullah and the Darbi family
in an attempt
to improve the process of
integration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
on this last
evening before Election Day, we
hear from
the next generation of voters
about the issues
they care about most.
We challenged our nationwide
network of Student
Reporting Labs to record young
people voicing
the concerns closest to their
hearts.
Here is a sample of their
responses.
The project is called Letters to
the Next
President.
CYNCERE PRESTON, Student: Both
candidates
should consider affordable
tuition plans,
because no one should be
deprived their right
to further their education.
My mother works a second job
just to help
pay for my college fees, so I'm
working extra
hard in school, so I can receive
as many scholarships
as possible.
DULCE SANABRIA, Student: I would
like our
next president to talk about
environmental
issues in a way that actually
makes us feel
inclined to do something about
them.
It's difficult to put ourselves
in a place
where we actually understand the
negative
impact that we're creating with
the pollution
that we make with things that we
think are
necessities like cars or
factories, when,
in reality, those things are not
going to
matter at all if we don't have a
healthy enough
planet to live on.
JAZLYN MIRANDA-MORALES, Student:
I want the
next president to focus on the
immigration
crisis.
Many people are living with fear
of being
deported and having their
families destroyed.
The next president should find a
path toward
citizenship for immigrants who
have been longtime
residents of our country.
Instead of being treated like
criminals, they
should be rewarded for the
positive contributions
they are making in our economy
and society.
ANDREW RUIZ, Student: What I
want to tell
the next president is that we
need to bring
God back into our government.
The term separation of church
and state means
that, -- and according to
letters written
by Thomas Jefferson -- that the
government
shall not interfere with church
teachings.
This is important, because we
have taken it
out of context saying that the
church has
no right to be in the
government.
When God was in our government,
our country
was truly good.
No Democrat or Republican can
fix it.
Only God can.
ABBY ROSS, Student: And I want
the next president
to know that women deserve equal
pay to men.
This is America, and we are
known for our
freedom.
Women are earning more college
and graduate
degrees than men, but are still
earning 79
cents to the dollar.
This is our time to be paid
equally, and it
was our time a long time ago.
GENEVA VANHORN, Student: I
believe that homelessness
is something that we need to
address in the
upcoming election.
I believe that we need to help
people who
have lower privileges get up off
of their
feet, because it's not always
their fault
why they made it their in the
first place.
It could have been something
like a spike
in taxes that caused them to
lose their home
and end up on the streets, like
I did.
While I was on the streets, I
realized basic
necessities like food and water
were almost
impossible to come by, and
people treated
you as if you were a lesser
human being.
So, we need to come together.
And whatever excess we have, we
have to use
to bring those people up off
their feet, so
they can be a useful member of
our communities.
TAYLOR KIKU ISHIMOTO, Student: I
would like
to tell the next president that
there are
415,000 children all over
America in foster
care systems.
When they exit the foster care
system, 50
percent of them will be
unemployed, 50 percent
of them will be homeless, and 33
percent will
have to go on public assistance.
MICHAEL INTRIERI, Student: I
want the next
president to help protect
children like me
from violence that has been
going around our
nation.
Going to school every day is
hard for us thinking
that we are unsafe and our lives
can be threatened
at any moment.
DANTE FAISON, Student: So, Mrs.
Chief Executive
or Mr. Head of State, if you
want to get these
votes, then you have got to be
the one to
make this change.
Give us peace of mind and
equality if you
are going to step onto this
grander stage,
because I'm tired of being
scared to walk
the streets as blood and bullets
rain.
What's to stop another brother
from taking
a gunshot to the head or through
his chest?
Dear America, I'm another
statistic, depending
on which way you see me.
You built him a statue, but your
law enforcement
soils what he was dreaming.
There's a whole monument to him
because he
signed off on our freedom.
Clearly, you all don't see the
greatness that
they were seeing.
But I digress.
I wish you both the best.
If we give you the keys to our
world, you
got to promise us true freedom.
Truly yours, the black nation,
the people
you should be healing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wow.
Let's hope the candidates are
listening to
all these young people.
You can see more of the letters,
over 100
of them, at
studentreportinglabs.org.
The project is a partnership
with the National
Writing Project and local PBS
station KQED
in California.
Also online right now, we have
much more election
coverage for you, including a
guide to when,
where and what to watch for as
results come
in.
And have you followed every
twist and turn
of this election?
Take our super quiz to see just
how well you
remember the 2016 race.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And again to
our honor roll
of American service personnel
killed in Iraq
and the Afghanistan conflict.
We add them as their deaths are
made official
and photographs become
available.
Here, in silence, are five more.
Tune in later tonight.
On "Charlie Rose," in an
exclusive interview,
New Jersey Governor Chris
Christie breaks
his silence on the Bridgegate
scandal.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Please join us online and again
right here
tomorrow for our special live
Election Day
coverage.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you.
And go vote, if you haven't
already.